Managing medicines for someone can be a challenge, particularly if they're taking several different types.


Although the person you care for may appreciate your support with their medicines, bear in mind that they have a right to confidentiality. It's up to them to decide how much of their health and medicines information is available to you as their carer, and how much you should be involved in their care.


How to give pills correctly:


Make sure you give medicines at the right time of day. If you give them at the wrong time, it could stop them working properly.


Make sure you know if the medicines should be taken with food or in between meals. Again, if you give them incorrectly, it could stop the medicine working properly or cause side effects.


Dosette boxes and medicine reminders:


If the person you care for has a complicated medicine regime with different pills taken at different times of the day, a pharmacist may decide to provide them in dosette boxes. These are plastic boxes with small compartments that clearly show which pills need to be taken at what time of day.


Dosette boxes are not always available for free on the NHS and they're not suitable for every type of medicine.


Other types of medicine reminders, such as automated dispensers, specially labelled packets and smartphone apps, are also available.


Ask your pharmacist for more information about medicine reminders.


Ask for a structured medication review:


If the person you care for is taking several different medicines their GP surgery may offer them a free structured medication review with a pharmacist or other healthcare professional. This is a review of the person's medicines and health, to make sure the medicines they're taking are right for them. It's a chance to ask questions and talk to the pharmacist in confidence about any problems they're having with their medicines.


Keep medicines organised:


Make sure medicines are all kept in one place in the home, preferably in a locked cupboard or drawer. This is particularly important if children live in or visit the house.


Make sure repeat prescriptions are dispensed in time so the person you look after does not run out of medicine.


If you spend a lot of time fetching prescriptions, ask the GP surgery if they can send prescriptions directly to the pharmacy. Some pharmacies also offer home delivery services.


Medicines safety tips:


 Be aware that overthecounter medicines should not be taken with prescribed medicines unless a doctor or pharmacist has confirmed it's safe to do so
 Be aware that if a dose of the medicine is missed, it's dangerous to take a double dose later on to make up for it
 Return any leftover medicines to the pharmacist for safe disposal


If they often forget to take their medicines:


 Telephone them when they need to take their medicine to remind them
 Arrange for care workers to visit at the same time medicines are meant to be taken
 Get them an automatic pill dispenser – this beeps when it's time to take the medicine


If they refuse to take their medicines:


Talk to their GP or pharmacist. They may be able to suggest a form of the medicine that's more acceptable than tablets. Some painkillers can be prescribed as a longacting patch.


Never give medicine to someone without their consent or try to force them to take it. People have the right to refuse medicine.


Check with their doctor or pharmacist before you crush tablets or open capsules and mix the powder with food or drink. It's not always safe to do this.


Help with swallowing difficulties:


Ask your GP or pharmacist if the medicine can be supplied in a soluble or liquid form.