Diabetes is a chronic (long-lasting) health condition that affects how your body turnsfood into energy.
There are three main types of diabetes: type 1, type 2, and gestational diabetes (diabetes while pregnant).


Your body breaks down most of the food you eat into sugar (glucose) and releases it into your bloodstream. When your blood sugar goes up, it signals your pancreas to release insulin. Insulin acts like a key to let the blood sugar into your body's cells for use as energy.


With diabetes, your body doesn't make enough insulin or can't use it as well as it should. When there isn't enough insulin or cells stop responding to insulin, too much blood sugar stays in your bloodstream. Over time, that can cause serious health problems, such as heart disease, vision loss, and kidney disease.


There isn't a cure yet for diabetes, but losing weight, eating healthy food, and being active can really help. Other things you can do to help: Take medicine as prescribed. Get diabetes self-management education and support.


Make and keep health care appointments. DSMES Services Ask your doctor to recommend a diabetes educator. You can also search the Find a DSMES Program for a list of educators in your community.
Type 1 diabetes is thought to be caused by an autoimmune reaction (the body attacks itself by mistake). This reaction stops your body from making insulin. If you have type diabetes, you'll need to take insulin every day to survive. People with type 1 diabetes in its early stages don’t have any symptoms. As type progresses, symptoms can appear suddenly, in just a few weeks or months, and can be severe. Currently, no one knows how to prevent type 1 diabetes, but if found early, type can be treated to avoid or delay symptoms. Type 1 diabetes is usually diagnosed in children and young adults but can be diagnosed at any age.


With type 2 diabetes, your body doesn’t use insulin well and can't keep blood sugar at normal levels. It develops over many years and is usually diagnosed in adults (but more and more in children, teens, and young adults). You may not notice any symptoms, so it's important to get your blood sugar tested if you're at risk.


Gestational diabetes develops in pregnant women who have never had diabetes. If you have gestational diabetes, your baby could be at higher risk for health problems. Gestational diabetes usually goes away after your baby is born. However, it increases your risk for type diabetes later in life. Your baby is more likely to have obesity as a child or teen and develop type diabetes later in life.
In the United States, more than in adults have prediabetes. About in 10 people with prediabetes don't know they have it. With prediabetes, blood sugar levels are higher than normal, but not high enough for a type diabetes diagnosis. Prediabetes raises your risk for type diabetes, heart disease, and stroke.


Prediabetes and type diabetes can be prevented with lifestyle changes. These include losing weight if you're overweight, eating a healthy diet, and getting regular physical activity.
Type 2 diabetes


Currently, no one knows how to prevent type diabetes, but in its early stages, type can be treated to avoid or delay symptoms and serious. If you're at risk for gestational diabetes, you may be able to prevent it with lifestyle changes, including healthy eating and regular physical activity.


If you have prediabetes, learn how the lifestyle change program can help you take healthy steps to prevent or delay type diabetes.


Diabetes by the numbers In the United States:More than 40 million Americans have diabetes, and more than in adults with diabetes don't know they have it, Diabetes is the seventh leading cause of death.Type diabetes accounts for about 90% to 95% of all diagnosed cases of diabetes; type diabetes accounts for about 5% to 10%.


Diabetes is the No. cause of kidney failure, lower-limb amputations, and adult blindness.


In the last 20 years, the number of adults diagnosed with diabetes has more than doubled. Diabetes is the most costly health condition in the United States, accounting for 25% of all health care spending and costing $640 billion in 2021. A Report Card: Diabetes in the United States