Itching in pregnancy is not usually caused by anything serious, but it can sometimes be a sign of a liver condition that needs treatment.
Itching in pregnancy is common. It can be caused by changes to hormone levels and your skin stretching as your baby grows. The itching usually stops after you've had your baby.
Itching in pregnancy can sometimes be caused by a liver condition called intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP). ICP can be serious and needs to be treated with medicine.
You're pregnant and have itchy skin, and the itchy skin is affecting your daily life, it does not get better after treatment from a pharmacist, or it keeps coming back.
You have eczema. This can get worse in pregnancy.
You have a new rash, lump or swelling. These symptoms are usually not harmful in pregnancy, but a GP can offer advice and treatment.
Get urgent medical help now if you're pregnant and you have very itchy skin, for example, it keeps you awake at night, the palms of your hands or soles of your feet are itchy, or the itching is worse at night.
These could be signs of intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy (ICP) that needs urgent treatment.
Call your maternity unit if you have the phone number.
If you cannot contact your maternity unit, call 111.
There are things you can do to help ease the itching and prevent damage to your skin from scratching.
Try to pat or tap your skin instead of scratching it. Have cool or warm (not hot) baths or showers. Use an unperfumed moisturiser or emollient on your skin regularly. Keep your nails short to avoid damaging your skin if you scratch. Wear loose clothing made from natural fibres like cotton.
Do not spend longer than 20 minutes in the bath or shower. Do not use perfumed soaps, deodorants or moisturisers. Do not have too much spicy food or drinks that contain caffeine, such as tea or coffee, as these can make your skin feel more itchy.
A pharmacist can suggest creams and lotions that are safe to use for itchy skin in pregnancy, suggest antihistamine medicines you can buy that are safe to use in pregnancy, suggest things you can do to ease the itching, and tell you if they think you need to see a GP or midwife.
Tell the pharmacist you're pregnant, where the itching is on your body and if you have any other symptoms.
Treatments for itching in pregnancy include antihistamine tablets, emollients, and steroid cream.
Some types of antihistamine can also help you sleep if itchy skin is keeping you awake at night.
Emollients are moisturising creams you put on your skin to soothe it and stop it drying out.
If your symptoms are very bad you may be referred to a doctor who specialises in skin problems (dermatologist), or a maternity unit if you have symptoms of ICP.
If you have ICP, a care plan will be agreed with you to keep you and your baby as healthy as possible. As part of the plan, you'll be offered extra appointments to check the health of you and your baby.
You'll also be offered medicines to treat your liver and help reduce the itching.
If you have ICP, there’s a small risk your baby may be born early (before 37 weeks). There is also a small risk of stillbirth if ICP is severe.
Your midwife and doctor may suggest starting labour early to reduce the risk.
Most people with ICP will make a full recovery and have a healthy birth.