WHO recommendations on maternal health: Counselling about healthy eating and keeping physically active during pregnancy is recommended for pregnant women to stay healthy and to prevent excessive weight gain during pregnancy.


A healthy diet contains adequate energy, protein, vitamins and minerals, obtained through the consumption of a variety of foods, including green and orange vegetables, meat, fish, beans, nuts, whole grains and fruit.


Stakeholders may wish to consider culturally appropriate healthy eating and exercise interventions to prevent excessive weight gain in pregnancy, particularly for populations with a high prevalence of overweight and obesity, depending on resources and women’s preferences. Interventions should be woman-centred and delivered in a non-judgemental manner, and developed to ensure appropriate weight gain.


A healthy lifestyle includes aerobic physical activity and strength-conditioning exercise aimed at maintaining a good level of fitness throughout pregnancy, without trying to reach peak fitness level or train for athletic competition. Women should choose activities with minimal risk of loss of balance and fetal trauma.


Most normal gestational weight gain occurs after 20 weeks of gestation and the definition of “normal” is subject to regional variations, but should take into consideration pre-pregnant body mass index (BMI). According to the Institute of Medicine classification, women who are underweight at the start of pregnancy (i.e. BMI < 18.5 kg/m2) should aim to gain 12.5-18 kg, women who are normal weight at the start of pregnancy (i.e. BMI 18.5-24.9 kg/m2) should aim to gain 11.5-16 kg, overweight women (i.e. BMI 25-29.9 kg/m2) should aim to gain 7-11.5 kg, and obese women (i.e. BMI > 30 kg/m2) should aim to gain 5-9 kg.


Most evidence on healthy eating and exercise interventions comes from high-income countries (HICs), and the GDG noted that that there are at least 40 ongoing trials in HICs in this field. The GDG noted that research is needed on the effects, feasibility and acceptability of healthy eating and exercise interventions in LMICs.


Pregnancy may be an optimal time for behaviour change interventions among populations with a high prevalence of overweight and obesity, and the longer-term impact of these interventions on women, children and partners needs investigation.


The GDG noted that a strong training package is needed for practitioners, including standardized guidance on nutrition. This guidance should be evidence-based, sustainable, reproducible, accessible and adaptable to different cultural settings.


In undernourished populations, nutrition education on increasing daily energy and protein intake is recommended for pregnant women to reduce the risk of low-birth-weight neonates.


Undernourishment is usually defined by a low BMI (i.e. being underweight). For adults, a 20-39% prevalence of underweight women is considered a high prevalence of underweight and 40% or higher is considered a very high prevalence. Mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) may also be useful to identify protein-energy malnutrition in individual pregnant women and to determine its prevalence in this population. However, the optimal cut-off points may need to be determined for individual countries based on context-specific cost-benefit analyses.


Anthropometric characteristics of the general population are changing, and this needs to be taken into account by regularly reassessing the prevalence of undernutrition to ensure that the intervention remains relevant.


The GDG noted that a strong training package is needed for practitioners, including standardized guidance on nutrition. This guidance should be evidence-based, sustainable, reproducible, accessible and adaptable to different cultural settings.


Stakeholders might wish to consider alternative delivery platforms (e.g. peer counsellors, media reminders) and task shifting for delivery of this intervention.


Areas that are highly food insecure or those with little access to a variety of foods may wish to consider additional complementary interventions, such as distribution of balanced protein and energy supplements (see Recommendation A.1.3).


In undernourished populations, balanced energy and protein dietary supplementation is recommended for pregnant women to reduce the risk of stillbirths and small-for-gestational-age neonates.


The GDG stressed that this recommendation is for populations or settings with a high prevalence of undernourished pregnant women, and not for individual pregnant women identified as being undernourished.


Undernourishment is usually defined by a low BMI (i.e. being underweight). For adults, a 20-39% prevalence of underweight women is considered a high prevalence of underweight and 40% or higher is considered a very high prevalence. MUAC may also be useful to identify protein-energy malnutrition in individual pregnant women and to determine its prevalence in this population. However, the optimal cut-off points may need to be determined for individual countries based on context-specific cost-benefit analyses.


Establishment of a quality assurance process is important to guarantee that balanced energy and protein food supplements are manufactured, packaged and stored in a controlled and uncontaminated environment. The cost and logistical implications associated with balanced energy and protein supplements might be mitigated by local production of supplements, provided that a quality assurance process is established.


A continual, adequate supply of supplements is required for programme success. This requires a clear understanding and investment in procurement and supply chain management.


Programmes should be designed and continually improved based on locally generated data and experiences. Examples relevant to this guideline include improving delivery, acceptability and utilization of this intervention by pregnant women.