If you are finding that your pregnancy is affecting your mental health, there are things that can help. Mental health support is available during and after your pregnancy.
Pregnancy can be a stressful time and can lead to problems with your mental health. Some people can get depression or anxiety for the first time during pregnancy.
If you've had depression or anxiety before getting pregnant, sometimes your symptoms may come back when you're pregnant.
Things you can do to help with your mental health include eating a healthy balanced diet, talking about your feelings to a friend, family member, midwife or doctor, trying to make time to regularly do something you enjoy, trying to stay active as regular exercise in pregnancy helps boost mood and improves sleep, signing up for antenatal classes, and being honest with your midwife, GP or any other healthcare professional caring for you about how you really feel.
Speak to your maternity unit or GP if you're worried about your mental health.
Support is available if you or someone you know are having a mental health crisis or emergency, no matter what you're going through.
Depression and anxiety in pregnancy can often be helped with a talking therapy, like cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).
Sometimes you may also be offered a medicine, like antidepressants.
If you need medicine, you'll be offered the safest type for you and your baby at the lowest dose that helps.
If you are already taking any prescribed medicine when you find out you are pregnant, then you should tell your doctor or specialist as soon as possible. Do not stop taking the medicine until you have spoken to them.
You should be referred to your local perinatal mental health service if you’re pregnant and you have a long-term mental health condition, such as bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), or an eating disorder, such an anorexia.
These services provide specialist mental health support for people during and after their
You should be offered regular appointments with a midwife with experience in helping people with your type of condition.