You can get depression when you're pregnant. It's called antenatal depression. With help and support most people with antenatal depression are able to manage the condition.
Some mood changes are normal in pregnancy, like feeling tired or irritable.
But if you often feel low and hopeless and no longer enjoy the things you used to, talk to a midwife or GP.
Signs and symptoms of antenatal depression include: feeling sad, a low mood, or tearful a lot of the time feeling irritable, or getting angry easily losing interest in other people and the world around you, not wanting to eat or eating more than usual, negative thoughts, such as worrying, you will not be able to look after your baby feeling guilty, hopeless or blaming yourself for your problems, having problems concentrating or making decisions
If antenatal depression is not treated your symptoms can get worse and may continue after the baby is born (postnatal depression). So it's important to get help if you need it.
Contact a GP immediately if you, or a friend or relative who is pregnant, starts hearing or seeing things that are not real (hallucinations) or develops strong beliefs not shared by others (delusions).
If it's not possible to contact a GP you can call 111 or get help from 111 online, or find your nearest A&E.
Call 999 if you think there is a danger that you might harm yourself or others.
Call 999 if you are worried that someone else might harm themselves or others.
Speak to a GP or your midwife as soon as possible if you think you might have antenatal depression.
With appropriate treatment and support, most people are able to manage their symptoms, though it can take time.
A GP or midwife may recommend self-help tips that can help improve your mood. These include talking about your feelings to a friend, family member, doctor or midwife, trying calming breathing exercises if you feel overwhelmed, increasing physical activity levels during pregnancy if you can, as it can improve your mood and help you sleep, attending antenatal classes to meet others who are expecting babies around the same time as you, and eating a healthy diet in pregnancy.
A GP may recommend a self-help course or refer you for NHS talking therapies.
You may have to wait several weeks to get an appointment. NHS talking therapies might be offered ‘face to face’ or online.
A GP should be able to explain more about different ways you can have talking therapy.
Antidepressant medicines may be recommended for you if you have moderate or severe depression and you do not want to have psychological therapy, psychological therapy has not worked for you, or you prefer to take medicine. Some people may benefit from having both psychological therapy and taking antidepressants.
Talk to a GP (or doctor in charge of your care) about antidepressants that are safer to take.
The doctor will usually offer the type with the lowest risk for you and your baby.
Your doctor can explain the risks and the benefits, and will help you decide which treatment is best for you and your baby.
Organisations that may have further, useful information or provide help and support if you have depression during pregnancy include PANDAS, National Childbirth Trust (NCT), Maternal Mental Health Alliance, and Tommy's.