If you're trying to get pregnant, there are things you can do to help keep you healthy before and during pregnancy, and help protect your baby too.


Before you start trying for a baby, it's recommended you have the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) vaccine (if you have not already) to protect your baby during pregnancy, check if your cervical screening (smear test) is due, if it is, book an appointment with your GP surgery, and get tested for sexually transmitted infections (STIs) if you think you or your partner may have one.


If you have any worries about getting pregnant, for example, if you've had treatment for cancer or you have a health condition, talk to your GP about planning.


There are things you can do before you start and while you're trying to get pregnant. Things that can help improve your chances of having a healthy pregnancy and baby include taking vitamins and supplements, including vitamin D and folic acid, getting support to help you stop smoking, not drinking alcohol, not using illegal drugs, having a healthy diet to help you stay well in pregnancy, and trying to keep to a healthy weight. If your weight is too low or too high it can make it harder to get pregnant, talk to your GP for advice on managing your weight.


Being overweight in pregnancy can increase the risk of complications like high blood pressure, pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes and blood clots. It's possible to reduce these risks, and your maternity team will support you throughout your pregnancy to help keep you and your baby as healthy as possible.


Do not stop taking any prescribed medicine until you've talked to your GP or specialist. They'll be able to discuss the safest treatment option for you while you're trying to get pregnant.


Speak to a GP if you want to get pregnant and you or your partner (if you have one) live with a condition, for example epilepsy, diabetes, sickle cell disease or HIV; you or your partner take prescribed or over-the-counter medicine, or any herbal remedies; you or your partner have a fertility issue, such as endometriosis or low sperm count; you cannot have sex or find it difficult to have sex, for example, because of a disability; you've been trying to get pregnant for 1 year or more through having sex; or you need help to stop smoking, drinking alcohol or using illegal drugs.


The time it takes to get pregnant is different for everyone. Different things can affect your chance of getting pregnant, such as your age, your general health, any fertility issues, how often you have sex, and how you're getting pregnant, for example, by having sex or through artificial insemination like intrauterine insemination (IUI).


If you're aged 39 or under and have sex without contraception every to 3 days, it's likely you'll get pregnant within a year.


If you're aged 39 or under and using artificial insemination (where sperm is put directly in the womb), it may take to 12 rounds of treatment to get pregnant.


You're more likely to get pregnant around the time you ovulate (release an egg). This is usually about 14 days before the start of your next period but depends on how long your menstrual cycle is.


If it's taking longer than expected to get pregnant, talk to your GP. They may refer you and your partner (if you have one) for tests.


If tests find a fertility issue, you may be offered medicine, surgery, IVF (in vitro fertilisation) or intrauterine insemination (IUI) depending on the cause.