Breastfeeding is a natural thing to do, but it still comes with its fair share of questions. Here's what you need to know about how often and how long to breastfeed your baby.
Newborn babies should breastfeed 8-12 times per day for about the first month. Breast milk is easily digested, so newborns are hungry often. Frequent feedings helps stimulate your milk production during the first few weeks.
By the time your baby is 1-2 months old, he or she probably will nurse 7-9 times a day.
In the first few weeks of life, breastfeeding should be "on demand" (when your baby is hungry), which is about every 1-1/2 to 3 hours. As newborns get older, they'll nurse less often, and may have a more predictable schedule. Some might feed every 90 minutes, whereas others might go 2-3 hours between feedings.
Newborns should not go more than about 4 hours without feeding, even overnight.
Count the length of time between feedings from the time your baby begins to nurse (rather than at the end) to when your little one starts nursing again.
Especially at first, you might feel like you're nursing around the clock, which is normal. Soon enough, your baby will go longer between feedings.
Newborns may nurse for up to 20 minutes or longer on one or both breasts. As babies get older and more skilled at breastfeeding, they may take about 5-10 minutes on each side.
How long it takes to breastfeed depends on you, your baby, and other things, such as whether your milk supply has come in (this usually happens 2-5 days after birth), your let-down reflex (which causes milk to flow from the nipple) happens right away or after a few minutes into a feeding, your milk flow is slow or fast, the baby has a good latch, taking in as much as possible of your areola (the dark circle of skin around your nipple), your baby begins gulping right away or takes it slow, and your baby is sleepy or distracted.
Call your doctor if you're worried that your baby's feedings seem too short or too long.
Alternate breasts and try to give each one the same amount of nursing time throughout the day. This helps to keep up your milk supply in both breasts and prevents painful engorgement (when your breasts overfill with milk).
You may switch breasts in the middle of each feeding and then alternate which breast you offer first for each feeding. It can help to attach a reminder — like a safety pin or small ribbon — to your bra strap so you'll know which breast your baby last nursed on. Then, start with that breast at the next feeding. Or, keep a notebook handy or use a breastfeeding app to keep track of how your baby feeds.
Your baby may like switching breasts at each feeding or prefer to nurse just on one side. If so, then offer the other breast at the next feeding. Do whatever works best and is the most comfortable for you and your baby.
After your baby finishes on one side, try burping before switching breasts. Sometimes, the movement alone can be enough to cause a baby to burp.
Some infants need more burping, others less, and it can vary from feeding to feeding.
If your baby spits up a lot, try burping more often. While it's normal for infants to "spit up" a small amount after eating or during burping, a baby should not vomit after feeding. If your baby throws up all or most of a feeding, there could be a problem that needs medical care. If you're worried that your baby is spitting up too much, call your doctor.
When babies go through a period of rapid growth (called a growth spurt), they want to eat more than usual. These can happen at any time. But in the early months, growth spurts often happen when a baby is: 7-14 days old, 2months old, 4months old, 6 months old
During these times and whenever your baby seems extra hungry, follow your little one's hunger cues. You may need to breastfeed more often for a while.
Experts recommend that babies be breastfed exclusively (without formula, water, juice, non breast milk, or food) for the first 6 months. Then, they recommend continuing to breastfeed for 2 years (and beyond) if it works for you and your baby. Any length of time your baby can be breastfed is beneficial.
Breastfeeding has many benefits for mom and baby both. Studies show that it can lessen a baby's chances of diarrhea, ear infections, and bacterial meningitis, or make symptoms less severe. Breastfeeding also may protect children from sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), diabetes, obesity, and asthma.
For moms, breastfeeding burns calories and helps shrink the uterus. In fact, breastfeeding moms might return to their pre-pregnancy shape and weight quicker. Breastfeeding also helps lower a woman's risk of diseases like breast cancer, high blood pressure, diabetes, and heart disease. It also might help protect moms from uterine cancer and ovarian cancer.