Antenatal (pregnancy) care and appointments
Antenatal care is the care you get from health professionals during your pregnancy to help keep you and your baby as healthy as possible. You'll usually see a midwife, and also a doctor if you need to.
You'll be offered appointments, including scans and tests, as part of your NHS antenatal care. Your appointments might be in different places, such as hospitals, GP surgeries or community clinics.
How to start your antenatal care
To start your NHS antenatal (pregnancy) care, you need to tell NHS maternity services that you're pregnant. You can do this by referring yourself for NHS pregnancy care as soon as you know you're pregnant.
When antenatal appointments happen
You'll be offered at least 10 antenatal appointments if this is your first baby, and ultrasound scans.
You'll have at least appointments if you've given birth before. This is because you usually do not need as many appointments as your first pregnancy.
If you have a partner, they can come to appointments if you would like them to.
You can contact maternity services at any time during your pregnancy if you're worried about your health or your baby’s health. You do not have to wait until your next appointment.
If you've referred yourself for pregnancy care and have not been given an appointment, contact local maternity services to ask for an appointment.
First midwife appointment at to 12 weeks
This is usually the first appointment you have with a midwife. It's sometimes called the booking appointment, and can take around 1 hour.
The midwife will ask about the date of your last period, any pregnancies you've had before, any health conditions you have, your mental health, things like exercise, alcohol and smoking, your job if you have one, your home situation, and your ethnic background.
They may also ask questions to check if they can offer extra support. This can include asking about domestic abuse, sexual abuse and female genital mutilation (FGM).
The midwife will give you information about screening tests you'll be offered in pregnancy, your options for giving birth, keeping well in pregnancy, and how to contact maternity services if you need to.
The midwife will ask to check your blood pressure and test your pee (urine). This is to check for high blood pressure in pregnancy, the pregnancy condition pre-eclampsia and urine infections. You'll also be offered a blood test to check your blood group.
Your maternity notes
Your midwife will give you your maternity notes in an app, book or folder, or on a secure
Your notes have your pregnancy appointments and test results, and useful phone numbers like the maternity unit and early pregnancy unit.
Keep your maternity notes with you at all times until you have your baby. This is so healthcare staff can read about your pregnancy health if you need urgent medical care.
11 to 14 week scan
You'll be offered an ultrasound scan to check when your baby is due, check their development and see if you're having more than one baby. It's sometimes called the dating scan.
Screening tests can also happen at this scan, to check your baby's chance of being born with certain health conditions. For example, you'll be offered screening for Down's syndrome, Edwards’ syndrome and Patau's syndrome.
It's your choice whether to have this screening.
16 week appointment
The midwife will ask about your health and wellbeing, and answer any questions you have.
They'll also discuss the results of previous screening tests, give you information about the next scan you'll be offered, ask to check your blood pressure, and ask to test your pee.
18 to 21 week scan
You'll be offered an ultrasound scan to check your baby's development. It's sometimes called the 20-week screening scan.
Testing for gestational diabetes
If you have a higher chance of having gestational diabetes, you'll be offered testing for this between 24 and 28 weeks.
25 week appointment
You'll have an appointment at 25 weeks if this is your first baby.
Ask to measure your bump (abdomen, or tummy) to check your baby's growth, talk about your choices and preferences for giving birth, and discuss any screening results with you.
28 week appointment
Give you information about labour and birth, including newborn screening.
Offer you an injection if your baby is at risk of haemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn (rhesus disease), to protect your baby's health.
Ask to do a blood test to check your health, iron levels and blood group.
Discuss any screening results with you.
31 week appointment
You'll be offered an appointment at 31 weeks if this is your first baby.
Discuss preparing for the birth, your preferences for birth and knowing when you're in labour.
Discuss screening results with you.
34 week appointment
Discuss preparing for the birth, your preferences for birth and knowing when you're in labour.
36 week appointment
Ask to feel your bump to check the position of the baby.
Discuss preparing for the birth, your preferences for birth and knowing when you're in labour.
38 week appointment
Discuss your choices if you're still pregnant after 40 weeks.
Ask to feel your bump to check the position of the baby.
40 week appointment
Discuss your choices if you're still pregnant after 40 weeks.
Ask to feel your bump to check the position of the baby.
41 week appointment