You do not need to follow a special diet while you're breastfeeding. But it's a good idea for you, just like everyone else, to eat a healthy diet with a variety of foods every day.


A healthy diet includes:
at least portions of different coloured fruit and vegetables a day, including fresh, frozen, tinned and dried fruit and vegetables, and no more than one 150ml glass of 100% unsweetened juice or smoothies
starchy foods, such as potatoes, bread, pasta, rice or other starchy carbohydrates — choose higher fibre or wholegrain varieties where possible
plenty of fibre from wholemeal bread and pasta, shredded whole wheat or bran cereals, brown rice, potatoes with the skin on, pulses such as beans and lentils, and fruit and vegetables — after having a baby, some women have bowel problems and constipation, and fibre can help with this
protein foods, such as beans, pulses, fish, eggs and lean meat


- dairy or dairy alternatives (which should be fortified with calcium, vitamin D and, if following a vegan diet, iodine), such as milk, cheese and yoghurt, choosing lower-fat and lower-sugar products where possible — these contain calcium and are a source of protein


- drinking plenty of fluids — have a drink beside you when you settle down to breastfeed:
water, low fat milk or diluted pure fruit juice are all good choices


See more detailed advice about healthy eating.


For more information and advice about eating healthily while breastfeeding, you can also talk to your GP or health visitor, or contact the National Breastfeeding Helpline on 0300 100 0212.


Eating fish while breastfeeding Eating fish is good for your and your baby's health.


Aim to eat at least portions of fish a week, one of which should be oily. Oily fish includes mackerel, sardines, trout and salmon. A portion is around 140g.


All girls and women, including breastfeeding women, should eat no more than portions of oily fish a week.


All adults should also eat no more than portion a week of shark, swordfish or marlin.


Vitamins and breastfeeding


Everyone, including pregnant and breastfeeding women, should consider taking a daily supplement containing 10mcg of vitamin D during the autumn and winter months.


Find out more about pregnancy and breastfeeding while taking a daily vitamin D supplement (colecalciferol)


From late March to the end of September, the majority of people aged 5 years and above will probably get enough vitamin D from sunlight when they're outdoors. So you might choose not to take a vitamin D supplement during these months. But some people may need to take a vitamin D supplement all year round.


Find out more about vitamin D


balanced diet. If you're on a restricted diet (such as a vegan diet), you may be advised to include foods and drinks with added vitamin B12 in your diet, or to take a vitamin B12 supplement.


Ask your GP or health visitor where to get vitamin supplements. You may be able to get free vitamin supplements if you're eligible for the Healthy Start scheme.


You're entitled to free NHS prescriptions for 12 months after your baby is born. You'll need to show a valid maternity exemption certificate to prove your entitlement.


If you did not apply for a maternity exemption certificate while you were pregnant, you can still apply at any time in the 12 months after your baby is born.


Healthy snack ideas for breastfeeding mums The following snacks are quick and simple to make, and will give you energy:


- fresh fruit with a handful of unsalted nuts
- lower-fat, lower-sugar yoghurts or fromage frais
- hummus with bread or vegetable sticks


- fortified lower sugar breakfast cereals, muesli or other wholegrain cereals with lower fat milk


- milky drinks or a 150ml glass of 100% unsweetened fruit juice


Get help to buy food and milk (Healthy Start)


If you're more than 10 weeks pregnant or have a child under 4, you may be entitled to get help to buy healthy food and milk. This is called the Healthy Start scheme.


If you're eligible, you'll be sent a Healthy Start card with money on it that you can use in some UK shops to buy milk (including formula milk), fruit, vegetables and pulses.


You can also use your Healthy Start card to get free vitamin supplements.


If you already have a Healthy Start card, ask your midwife or health visitor where you can use the card to get vitamins.


Caffeine and breastfeeding


Caffeine can reach your baby through your breast milk. Caffeine is a stimulant, so if you have a lot, it may make your baby restless and keep them awake.


Caffeine occurs naturally in lots of foods and drinks, including coffee, tea and chocolate. It's also added to some soft drinks and energy drinks, as well as some cold and flu remedies.


There’s not enough information to say how much caffeine is too much, and babies respond to caffeine differently. But it’s a good idea to reduce how much caffeine you drink, especially when your baby is less than 6 months old.


The amount of caffeine in different foods and drinks can vary, depending on things like the type of tea or coffee, or how long you leave a teabag to brew.


If you're breastfeeding, it’s recommended that you have no more than 200mg a day. As an example, this may include mug, can or bar of:
 coffee (90mg)
tea (55mg)
green tea (38mg)
 cola (37mg
 energy drink (a 250ml can is 80mg)
 plain dark chocolate (a 50g bar is less than 25mg)
plain milk chocolate (a 50g bar is less than 10mg)


You could also try herbal teas, 100% fruit juice (but no more than one 150ml glass per day) or mineral water.
If you'd like to eat peanuts or foods containing peanuts, such as peanut butter, while breastfeeding, you can do so as part of a healthy, balanced diet (unless, of course, you're allergic to them).


If you have any questions or concerns about food allergies, you can talk to your GP, midwife or health visitor.