Folic acid is the only type of folate (vitamin B9) shown to help prevent neural tube defects.
All women capable of becoming pregnant should get 400 micrograms of folic acid daily.


|t's important to educate patients about folic acid, its benefits, and its sources.


Folic acid is a type of folate (vitamin BY) that is essential for cell growth and development. The terms "folate" and "folic acid" are often used interchangeably. However, folate is a general term used to describe all the different types of vitamin B9. This includes folates found in foods, like leafy greens, and other types found in supplements, like folic acid.


Folic acid is more stable than food folates and it remains stable even through cooking or baking. This allows it to remain active in supplements and fortified foods. That is why folic acid is added to foods such as bread, pasta, some breakfast cereals, and some corn masa flour.


A woman needs enough folate in early pregnancy to properly form the neural tube, which becomes the baby's brain and spine. Folic acid plays a particularly important role in early pregnancy. Many studies show that taking folic acid before and during early pregnancy lowers the chance of neural tube defects. Getting 400 micrograms (mcg) of folic acid daily can help prevent neural tube defects (NTDs).




CDC recommends all women capable of becoming pregnant get 400 mcg of folic acid daily. This recommendation is supported by the Institute of Medicine and US Preventive Services Task Force. It can be difficult for most people to get the recommended daily amount from food folates (like leafy greens) alone. In addition to eating folate- rich foods from a balanced diet, folic acid can be obtained through:
 Dietary supplements. A daily multivitamin containing 400 mcg of folic acid.
Fortified foods. Folic acid is added to foods like some breakfast cereals and corn masa flour. These products are labeled as "enriched."


Acombination of the two. Eating fortified foods and taking a daily multivitamin.


Recurrence prevention after a prior NTD affected pregnancy


Women who had a previous pregnancy affected by an NTD face higher risks of having another pregnancy affected by an NTD. If they are planning another pregnancy, it is recommended they get 4,000 mcg of folic acid daily. This should start one month before trying to conceive and continue through the first 3 months of pregnancy.


If they are not planning a pregnancy, the general recommendation of 400 mcg of folic acid daily applies.






Patient counseling


As a healthcare professional, you play an important role in educating patients about the benefits of folic acid. Below are some key considerations for counseling.


- Start conversations about folic acid and its benefits before pregnancy. Encourage all women capable of becoming pregnant to get 400 mcg of folic acid daily.


For patients planning pregnancy and not currently taking folic acid, advise starting a folic acid containing vitamin at least 1 month before conception and continuing during pregnancy. Waiting until the first prenatal visit to start folic acid consumption will not prevent NTDs.


Share information on the different sources of folic acid, such as multivitamins and fortified foods. Explain how patients can get the recommended amount of folic acid daily by including fortified foods and/or multivitamins in their diets.
Encourage patients to check their supplement and fortified food labels to ensure they contain folic acid. Explain how to read Supplement and Nutrition fact labels or show them what to Look for.


Folic Acid Resources


MTHFR gene variants


The MTHFR gene provides instructions for an enzyme that helps process folate in the body. After testing with a direct-to-consumer genetic testing kit, patients may be seeking guidance on taking folic acid given their MTHFR genotype.


The most common variant in the MTHFR gene is MTHFR C677T. This variant involves a change at position 677 in the MTHFR gene, which can


result in the following genotypes:
MTHFR 677 CC ° MTHFR 677 CT MTHFR 677 TT


With similar folate intake, people with the MTHFR TT genotype have an average amount of folate in their blood that is only slightly lower (about 16% lower) than those with the MTHFR CC genotype. However, studies show that getting 400 mcg of folic acid daily can increase blood folate levels, regardless of their MTHFR genotype.


Folic acid is the only type of folate shown to help prevent NTDs. (6] There are no clinical recommendations at this time to test for


MTHFR status or for consuming a different amount of folate or folic acid on the basis of the MTHFR genotype.


No matter which MTHFR genotype your patient has, you can assure them that folic acid is safe and essential for all women capable of becoming pregnant.




Daily multivitamin use has declined among women of reproductive age in the United States. (9] Specifically, this decline was observed among women aged 25-44 years, as well as among non-Hispanic White and Hispanic women. Among different age groups, women aged 18-24 years reported the lowest daily multivitamin use.


Additionally, a CDC study found that about half of U.S. women report enriched cereal grain products as their only source of folic acid. (10) Consuming folic acid from a combination of sources like supplements and fortified foods:
- Helps people get the recommended 400 mcg of folic acid daily; and


- Can prevent up to 700 additional NTDs each year. (10)


At-risk populations


Research shows that some groups are still not getting enough folic acid to lower their risk of NTDs. Hispanic/Latina women have a high risk of a having a child born with an NTD. (14) (13)


Changes to Nutrition and Supplement Facts labels


Nutrition Facts and Supplement Facts labels have recently undergone changes, including the units of measure for folate. Folate is now shown as "mcg DFE" (micrograms of dietary folate equivalents). The new labels provide information on both the amount of folate in mcg DFE and the amount of folic acid per serving. If folic acid is present in the product, it will be listed in parentheses alongside the total folate content.


Supplement Facts


Serving Size 1 Tablet


Vitamin B12 Pantothenic Acid Calcium


Iron


Magnesium


Zinc


400 meg of folic acid is part of the total folate per serving


To prevent anemia, individuals should get 400 mcg DFE (100% daily value (DV) for folate). This is equal to 240 mcg folic acid. However, it takes


more folic acid to help prevent NTDs than to prevent anemia. The recommendation is to get 400 mcg of folic acid to help prevent NTDs. This is equal to 667 mcg DFE (167% DV).


Generally, vitamins contain 400 to 800 mcg of folic acid, but some contain other types of folate (such as 5-MTHF) instead. Folic acid is the only type of folate shown to help prevent NTDs. No scientific studies exist that show that supplements containing other types of folate can prevent NTDs. It's important to remind patients to check supplement labels to ensure they contain folic acid.