Healthy eating is all about balance. Infants can begin eating complementary foods around 6 months. For children 6 months and older, some foods and drinks are not safe. Some foods and drinks are less healthy choices.


Honey given to children younger than 12 months may cause a severe food poisoning called botulism. Do not give your child honey before 12 months. Do not add honey to your baby's food, water, infant formula, or pacifier.


Foods with added sugars


Infants and young children should not have added sugars. Foods with added sugars can include:
 Muffins.


Flavored yogurts.


Cookies.


Check the Nutrition Facts Label / to find foods with no added sugars.
Complementary foods and drinks need to be nutrient-dense


What the Dietary Guidelines for Americans says about added sugar in food and drinks


Infants and young children have no room in their diet for added sugars and not contain additional calories from added sugars.


Foods high in salt


Avoid feeding foods high in salt (sodium) to young children. These foods may include:
- Some canned foods (choose low sodium or no salt added).


- Processed meats (for example, lunch meats, sausages, hot dogs, ham).


- Some frozen dinners.


Some snack foods and store-bought packaged foods for toddlers are high in sodium. Check the Nutrition Facts Label / to find foods with less sodium.


Fish high in mercury


Avoid feeding fish high in mercury to young children. These fish include:


- King mackerel.


Marlin.


- Orange roughy.


- Shark.


- Swordfish.


- Tilefish (from the Gulf of Mexico).


- Tuna (bigeye).


Mercury can harm the brain and nervous system if a person is exposed to too much of it over time. While limiting mercury in children's diets is important, many types of fish:


° Are lower in mercury.


- Have important nutrients that support brain development and the immune system.


- Support a healthy diet.


Learn more about which fish to avoid and which to choose to best support your child's brain and nervous system development.


Before serving fish caught by family and friends, check for fish and shellfish advisories. Unpasteurized drinks or foods


Unpasteurized drinks or foods—such as unpasteurized juices, milk, yogurt, or cheeses—may put your child at risk for harmful bacteria that can cause severe diarrhea. Do not give your child unpasteurized drinks or foods such as:


» Unpasteurized juice.
° Unpasteurized milk (often called raw milk).
» Unpasteurized yogurt.


» Unpasteurized cheeses.


Did you know?


You should avoid giving your child certain foods and drinks. To learn more, watch these videos from 1,000 Days.


Drinks to avoid or limit


Sugar-sweetened drinks


Sugar-sweetened drinks (or sugary drinks) contain added sugars. They may include:
- Soda, soft drinks, cola, or pop.


- Flavored milk.


- Sports drinks.


° Flavored water with sugar.


- Juice drinks.


These drinks are different from 100% juice. Children younger than 24 months should not have added sugars.


These include water and unflavored, unsweetened milk. Low-lactose or lactose-free milk and unsweetened, fortified dairy alternatives are also healthy choices. Learn more about foods and drinks to encourage for young children.


Beverages with no added sugars are the best choice.


Cow's milk before 12-months old


Giving cow's milk to your baby before 12 months may put them at risk for intestinal bleeding. Cow's milk also has too many proteins and minerals for your baby's kidneys to handle easily. In addition, cow's milk does not have the right amount of nutrients your baby needs.


Juice before 12 months


Children younger than 12 months should not drink any fruit or vegetable juice. Juice after 12 months is unnecessary. The American Academy of Pediatrics (% recommends no more than ounces of 100% fruit juice a day for children ages through 3 years. Check the Nutrition Facts Label (7 to make sure the juice is 100% juice. Fruit drinks, fruit-flavored drinks, and juice drinks have added sugars and children should not have them


Whole fruits are healthier options for your child than fruit juices. Go to Good Nutrition Starts Early for tips on introducing young children to healthy foods, including a variety of fruits and vegetables.


Try whole fruits instead of juice.


Caffeinated drinks


Children younger than 24 months (2 years) should avoid caffeinated drinks, such as soft drinks, tea, coffee, and sports drinks. There is no.
established safe limit of caffeine for young children.


These are just examples of foods and drinks. The lists do not include all possible foods and drinks to avoid or limit. Talk with your child’s doctor


or nurse if you have more questions about which foods or drinks to avoid or limit.


Rethink your child's food and drink


Learn more about foods and drinks to encourage for young children.