Most life-threatening conditions, whether the original cause was medical or surgical, infection or injury, will present with one of these. In some cases the diagnosis may be known, while in others, intervention may be required before a diagnosis can be made, perhaps because of limited diagnostic resources, but often because of the acuity of the condition. These modules introduce a systematic approach to assessment and management that can be used whether or not a diagnosis has been made.
Frontline health-care providers will face many more presentations than are covered in this course. This material is not meant to cover every acute condition, but to help providers address time-sensitive conditions where early intervention has the potential to save lives. The course is designed to lay a foundation for broader emergency assessment and management. Many participants may already, or will later, be trained to provide care beyond what is described here.
Recommendations for handover to an “advanced provider” are meant to signal the need for care beyond the scope of this course. In some cases, participants themselves may already be trained to provide this additional care.
These complaints may represent the early stage of a critical illness requiring rapid intervention even when the person appears relatively well. The complete assessment and management of these conditions is beyond the scope of this course, but they should always trigger transport to, or consultation with, an advanced provider.
When associated with abnormal ABCDE findings, or any of the acute presentations above, fever can be an important clue to severe illness and should be taken very seriously. There are many more causes of fever than can be covered in this basic course, but most causes of fever requiring emergency treatment are associated with one of the four key acute presentations.
There is no single approach to fever that is right for all emergencies, but there are some general principles that can help in the assessment and management of emergency patients.
Always consider infection in a person with fever, for example malaria, meningitis, pneumonia.
Never use the absence of fever to rule out infection. People with overwhelming infection or immune system problems may not be able to produce a fever and may have a normal or low body temperature.
Fever with abnormal vital signs and/or any of the four key acute conditions listed above will likely require early antibiotic and/or anti-malarial treatment.
Always consider whether local screening protocols for infectious disease outbreaks, such as haemorrhagic fevers, require further action in a person with fever.
The decision about whether or not CPR is appropriate for a specific patient depends on many factors, including understanding of the cause of the condition, knowledge of available resources, and awareness of relevant institutional protocols and practices. There are many situations where it may be appropriate to initiate and then terminate CPR after a certain interval, and others where it may not be appropriate to initiate CPR. While this course addresses several aspects of resuscitation, it does not cover general CPR protocols, as they may vary greatly by setting.
The medications discussed in this course are widely available and appropriate for use by the frontline providers for whom the course is designed. They can be used in pre-hospital or facility-based settings and are important early treatments for emergency conditions. The included medications provide a foundation for initial emergency care, but almost every condition discussed in this workbook will require treatments beyond those listed. Many important emergency treatments used by advanced providers are not included in this course.
This course is designed to help providers identify and provide initial management for acute, life-threatening conditions. Most acutely ill patients will require care beyond this initial stage. This may be ongoing care delivered by the same provider, but more often will require handover to a more advanced provider or facility. This process of deciding the appropriate disposition, or next step of care, for the acutely ill patient is a vital part of emergency care.
Choosing an appropriate disposition involves assessing severity; estimating how rapidly the condition may progress; considering whether transfer for a specific intervention such as surgery or blood transfusion is needed; and identifying any specific risks based on a suspected or known diagnosis, such as risk of recurrent seizure/convulsion or worsening airway blockage.
Planning for handover/transfer requires communicating essential information with the receiving facility, creating a transport plan, and ensuring availability of the necessary supplies to protect providers and care for patients.
Triage is the systematic process of classifying patients by acuity to ensure the best match between available resources and user needs. Triage is an essential component of emergency care during routine and surge conditions, and is a higher-level process applied to all patients, allowing assessment of the individual patient in context.
The BEC course is intended for a wide range of frontline providers and offers a basic approach for life-threatening presentations. Emergency conditions often require urgent intervention long before a diagnosis is established, and a presentation-based approach is essential to managing patients effectively. The modules in this course teach the elements of a general approach that can be used for any emergency patient.
The ABCDE approach allows rapid assessment and intervention for life threats using the following categories: Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability and Exposure.
The SAMPLE history is a method of rapidly gathering the history critical to the management of the acutely ill patient. SAMPLE stands for Signs and Symptoms, Allergies, Medications, Past Medical History, Last Oral Intake and Events surrounding the illness or injury.
The secondary survey is a complete physical examination based on the specific condition.
Approaching every patient in a systematic way ensures that life-threatening conditions are recognized promptly and that the most critical interventions are done first. In a stable patient, the initial ABCDE approach may only take seconds to a few minutes. The ABCDE should be followed by a rapid history using the SAMPLE approach. Using the standard SAMPLE and ABCDE approach together ensures that different providers can easily communicate about acutely ill patients.
The goal of the ABCDE approach is to rapidly identify life-threatening conditions, ensure the airway stays open, and ensure that breathing and circulation are adequate to deliver oxygen to the body.
The goal of the SAMPLE approach is to rapidly gather history critical to the management of the acutely ill patient.
A critical part of the approach to any ill or injured patient is keeping providers and others safe. Safety considerations involve checking for scene hazards, violence and infectious disease risk.
You may not know the cause of illness or injury when you first approach a patient, and without appropriate personal protective equipment, may expose yourself to diseases, chemicals or poisons. You must use appropriate PPE every time you approach a patient. Always protect yourself from any exposure to bodily fluids. This will almost always require gloves and eye protection, and may require a gown and mask.
Infectious disease exposure is a significant risk. Use PPE and wash your hands before and after every patient contact. Between patients, clean and disinfect all facility and vehicle surfaces and all reusable equipment.
Decontamination may be required after exposure to pesticides or other chemicals. Not all chemicals can be safely washed away, and some must be removed in specific ways to avoid further injury. You must wear appropriate PPE for this.
If multiple people are injured or ill, call for help or send someone to call. If advanced care is needed, begin making arrangements as early as possible for consultations or transfers.
The ABCDE approach provides a framework for the systematic and organized evaluation of acutely ill patients in order to rapidly identify and intervene for life-threatening conditions.
A - Airway: check for and correct any obstruction to movement of air into the lungs.
B - Breathing: ensure adequate movement of air into the lungs.
C - Circulation: evaluate whether there is adequate perfusion to deliver oxygen to the tissues; check for signs of life-threatening bleeding.
D - Disability: assess and protect brain and spine functions.
E - Exposure: identify all injuries and any environmental threats and avoid hypothermia.
This stepwise approach is designed to ensure that life-threatening conditions can be identified and treated early, in order of priority. If a problem is discovered in any of these steps, it must be addressed immediately before moving on to the next step. The ABCDE approach should be performed in the first 5 minutes and repeated whenever a patient's condition changes or worsens.
Can the patient talk normally? If yes, the airway is open.
If the patient cannot talk normally, look to see if the chest wall is moving and listen to see if there is air movement from the mouth or nose. Listen for abnormal sounds such as stridor, grunting or snoring, or a hoarse or raspy voice that indicates a partially obstructed airway. Stridor plus swelling and/or hives suggest a severe allergic reaction. Look and listen for fluid such as blood or vomit in the airway. Look for foreign body or abnormal swelling around the airway, and altered mental status. Check if the patient is able to swallow saliva or is drooling.
If the patient is unconscious and not breathing normally, without trauma open the airway using the head-tilt and chin-lift manoeuvre. If there is concern for trauma, maintain cervical spine immobilization and open the airway using the jaw thrust manoeuvre. Place an oropharyngeal or nasopharyngeal airway to maintain the airway.
If a foreign body is suspected, if the object is visible, remove it and be careful not to push the object any deeper. If the patient is able to cough or make noises, keep the patient calm and encourage coughing. If the patient is choking, unable to cough and not making sounds, use age-appropriate chest thrusts, abdominal thrusts or back blows. If the patient becomes unconscious while choking, follow relevant CPR protocols.
If secretions or vomit are present, suction when available, or wipe clean. Consider placing the patient in the recovery position if the rest of the ABCDE is normal and no trauma is suspected.
If the patient has swelling, hives or stridor, consider severe allergic reaction and give intramuscular adrenaline. Allow the patient to stay in a position of comfort and prepare for rapid handover/transfer to a centre capable of advanced airway management, if needed.
Look, listen and feel to see if the patient is breathing. Assess if breathing is very fast, very slow or very shallow. Look for signs of increased work of breathing such as accessory muscle use, chest indrawing/retractions, nasal flaring or abnormal chest wall movement. Listen for abnormal breath sounds such as wheezing or crackles. With severe wheezing, there may be limited or no breath sounds on examination because narrowing of the airways may be so severe that breathing cannot be heard.
Listen to see if breath sounds are equal on both sides. Check for the absence of breath sounds and dull sounds with percussion on one side. If there are no breath sounds on one side and hypotension, check for distended neck veins or a shifted trachea.
Check oxygen saturation with a pulse oximeter when available.
If unconscious with abnormal breathing, start bag-valve-mask ventilation and follow relevant CPR protocols. If not breathing adequately, begin bag-valve-mask ventilation with oxygen. If oxygen is not immediately available, do not delay ventilation.
If breathing fast or hypoxic, give oxygen. If wheezing, give salbutamol. If concern for severe allergic reaction, give intramuscular adrenaline. If concern for tension pneumothorax, perform needle decompression immediately and give IV fluids and oxygen. If concern for large pleural effusion or haemothorax, give oxygen and plan for rapid handover/transfer.
Look and feel for signs of poor perfusion, including cool, moist extremities, delayed capillary refill, low blood pressure, tachypnoea, tachycardia and absent pulses.
Look for both external and internal bleeding, including bleeding into the chest, abdomen, stomach or intestine, from pelvic or femur fracture, and from wounds.
Look for hypotension, distended neck veins and muffled heart sounds that might indicate pericardial tamponade.
For cardiopulmonary arrest, follow relevant CPR protocols.
If signs of poor perfusion, give IV fluids and oxygen. For external bleeding, apply direct pressure or use another technique to control bleeding. If internal bleeding or pericardial tamponade are suspected, refer rapidly to a centre with surgical capabilities.
Assess level of consciousness with the AVPU scale or, in trauma cases, the Glasgow Coma Scale. Always check glucose level in the confused or unconscious patient. Check pupil size, whether the pupils are equal, and if pupils are reactive to light. Check movement and sensation in all four limbs. Look for abnormal repetitive movements or shaking on one or both sides of the body.
If altered mental status and no evidence of trauma, place the patient in the recovery position. If glucose is low or glucose testing is not available and the patient has altered mental status, give glucose. For active seizures, give a benzodiazepine. If pregnant and having seizures, give magnesium sulphate. If pupils are small and breathing is slow, consider opioid overdose and give naloxone. If pupils are not equal, consider increased pressure on the brain and raise the head of the bed 30 degrees if there is no concern for spinal injury.
Examine the entire body for hidden injuries, rashes, bites or other lesions. Rashes such as hives can indicate allergic reaction, and other rashes can indicate serious infection.
If snake bite is suspected, immobilize the limb. Take a picture of the snake if possible from a distance and send with the patient. Do not risk additional bites to catch or kill the snake.
Remove constricting clothing and all jewelry. Cover the patient as soon as possible to prevent hypothermia. Acutely ill patients have difficulty regulating body temperature. Remove wet clothes and dry the patient thoroughly. Respect the patient and protect modesty during exposure.
The airway can become obstructed by secretions, vomit or foreign bodies. Remove the foreign body if possible and suction fluid. Be careful not to push a foreign body further into the airway. Do not try to remove a foreign body unless clearly visible. Use age-appropriate chest thrusts, abdominal thrusts or back blows if the airway is completely obstructed.
The tongue may obstruct the airway in patients with a decreased level of consciousness. Open the airway using a head-tilt and chin-lift manoeuvre, or use jaw thrust if there is concern for trauma, and place an oral or nasopharyngeal airway as needed. These patients may also not be able to protect their airway and need to be watched for vomiting and aspiration.
Burns can cause airway swelling due to inhalational injuries. Give oxygen to all patients with suspected airway burn even if they do not show signs of hypoxia. Open the airway using appropriate manoeuvre and place an oral or nasopharyngeal airway as needed. Maintain cervical spine immobilization if there is evidence of trauma. The airway can swell and close off very quickly in burn patients.
Severe allergic reactions can cause swelling of the airway that can lead to obstruction. Give intramuscular adrenaline for airway obstruction, severe wheezing or shock. Place an IV and give IV fluids. Reposition the airway as needed and give oxygen. If severe or not improving, prepare for rapid handover/transfer for advanced airway management.
Airway obstruction may result from injuries to the head or neck. Blood, bone or damaged tissue may block the airway. Penetrating wounds to the neck may also cause obstruction due to swelling or expanding haematoma. Suction to remove blood that might block the airway. Open the airway using jaw thrust only if there is trauma and place an oral airway as needed. Do not use nasopharyngeal airways if there is facial trauma. Maintain cervical spine immobilization if there is evidence of trauma.
For any abnormal airway sounds, re-assess the airway frequently as partial obstruction may worsen rapidly and block the airway.
Any pneumothorax can become a tension pneumothorax. Air in the cavity between the lungs and the chest wall can collapse the lung. Building pressure from a large pneumothorax can displace and block flow from the main vessels back to the heart, causing shock.
If tension pneumothorax is suspected, perform emergency needle decompression. Give oxygen and IV fluids. Arrange for rapid handover/transfer to an advanced provider capable of placing a chest tube.
Opioid medications such as morphine, pethidine and heroin can decrease the body's drive to breathe. Signs include slow respiratory rate, hypoxia and very small pupils. Give naloxone to reverse the effects of opioids. Monitor closely as naloxone will wear off and additional doses may be needed. Give oxygen.
Asthma and COPD are conditions causing spasm in the lower airways, resulting in narrowing that causes difficulty in breathing and wheezing. Signs include wheezing, cough, accessory muscle use and possible history of asthma/COPD diagnosis, allergies or smoking. Administer salbutamol as soon as possible. Give oxygen if indicated.
Pleural effusion occurs when fluid builds up in the space between the lung and the chest wall or diaphragm. As the fluid builds up, it limits expansion of the lungs. Signs include decreased breath sounds on the affected side and dull sounds with percussion. If there is a large amount of fluid, there may be shock. Give oxygen and arrange for handover/transfer immediately.
Pulselessness presents with no pulse, unconsciousness and no breathing. Follow relevant cardiopulmonary resuscitation protocols.
Poor perfusion is the failure to deliver enough oxygen-carrying blood to the vital organs. When poor perfusion continues until organ function is affected, this is called shock and can lead rapidly to death.
Signs of shock include rapid heart rate, rapid breathing, pale and cool skin, capillary refill greater than 3 seconds, sweating, dizziness, confusion, altered mental status and hypotension.
Initial treatment for shock includes laying the patient flat if tolerated, giving oxygen, controlling bleeding, starting an IV and giving IV fluids. If there are signs of infection, give antibiotics if available. Prepare for rapid handover/transfer.
External bleeding that is not controlled can lead quickly to shock. A large quantity of blood can also be lost into the chest, pelvis, thigh and abdomen before the bleeding is recognized.
Stop the bleeding. Depending on the source, use direct pressure, deep wound packing, a tourniquet, pelvic binder or femur splint. Give IV fluids. Refer for blood transfusion and ongoing surgical management if needed. A tourniquet should be used only for life-threatening bleeding.
Pericardial tamponade occurs when fluid builds up in the sac around the heart. The pressure from this fluid can collapse the chambers of the heart and keep them from filling properly, limiting blood flow to the tissues and causing shock. Signs include poor perfusion, distended neck veins, muffled heart sounds, dizziness, confusion and altered mental status. Treatment is drainage by pericardiocentesis. Give IV fluids to ensure that as much volume as possible enters the heart. Refer rapidly for surgical management.
Patients with hypoglycaemia need glucose immediately. If the person can speak and swallow, give oral glucose. If the person cannot speak or is unconscious, give IV glucose if possible. If IV glucose is not possible or available, give buccal glucose.
Increased pressure on the brain can occur from trauma, tumours, increased fluid, bleeding or infections. Signs include headache, seizures/convulsions, nausea, vomiting, altered mental status, unequal pupils and weakness on one side of the body. Because the skull is rigid, any swelling, fluid or mass increases the pressure around the brain, limiting blood flow and possibly displacing brain tissue, causing death.
Raise the head of the bed to 30 degrees if there is no concern for trauma and there is no hypotension. Check glucose. If there are seizures/convulsions, give a benzodiazepine. The pressure must be reduced as quickly as possible. Arrange for rapid handover/transfer to a surgical centre.
Signs of an active seizure include repetitive movements, gaze fixed to one side or alternating rhythmically and not responsive. Signs of a recent seizure include bitten tongue, urination on self, known history of seizures/convulsions and confusion that gradually improves over minutes to hours.
The goal in managing seizures/convulsions is to prevent hypoxia and injury. Protect the seizing person from falls and from hard or sharp objects nearby. Do not place anything in the mouth of a person with active seizure except to suction airway. Give oxygen. Check blood glucose and give glucose if below 3.5 mmol/L. Treat with a benzodiazepine and monitor closely for slowing or difficult breathing. Place the patient in recovery position if there is no trauma suspected. If the patient is pregnant or recently gave birth, give magnesium sulphate.
The goal of managing snake bites is to limit the spread of the venom and the effects of venom on the body. Signs may include bite marks, oedema, blistering of the skin, bruising, hypotension, paralysis, seizures and bleeding from wounds. Immobilize the extremity. Take a picture of the snake when possible and send with the patient. Give IV fluids if there is evidence of shock. These patients may have delayed shock or airway problems. Monitor closely and plan early for rapid handover/transfer.
A full set of vital signs, including blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate and oxygen saturation if available, should be performed after the ABCDE approach. Do not delay ABCDE interventions for vital signs.
The ABCDE approach should be repeated at least every 15 minutes or with any change in condition.
While the ABCDE approach is used in both adults and children, there are some aspects of assessing and managing children that are different from adults.
Excessive drooling, stridor, airway swelling and unwillingness to move the neck are all high-risk signs in children. Look carefully in the airway for foreign bodies, burns or obstruction. Allow the child to remain in a position of comfort.
Compared to adults, children have bigger tongues, shorter necks with airways that are softer and more easily blocked, and a larger head compared to the rest of the body. Place the child in the sniffing position, avoid over-extending or flexing the neck, watch closely for airway obstruction, use the jaw thrust if the airway is not open, and position the head using padding under the shoulders for very small children if there is no trauma.
For choking, use age-appropriate chest thrusts, abdominal thrusts or back blows.
Nasal flaring, head bobbing, grunting and chest indrawing or retractions are signs of respiratory distress in children. Cyanosis is the result of a lack of oxygen and is a danger sign. Chest indrawing is a common presentation of paediatric accessory muscle use.
A silent chest, with no breath sounds when listening to the chest, is a sign of severe respiratory distress in a child. With severe spasm and narrowing of the airways, there may be limited air movement and few breath sounds on examination. Give salbutamol and oxygen and re-assess frequently.
Stridor signals severe airway compromise. Children with stridor should be allowed to stay in a position of comfort and transferred immediately to an advanced provider.
Low blood pressure in a child is a sign of severe shock. Children are able to maintain normal blood pressure for longer than adults when in shock. Closely monitor other signs of poor perfusion, such as decreased urine output and altered mental status.
The amount of intravenous fluid given to children is different from adults. In malnourished children, both the rate of fluid administration and the type of fluid are different.
Low blood glucose is a very common cause of altered mental status in sick children. If possible, check blood glucose in children with altered mental status. When it is not possible to check the blood glucose level, administer glucose. Always check for seizure/convulsions.
Infants and children have difficulty maintaining temperature and can very quickly become hypothermic or hyperthermic. Remove wet clothing and dry skin thoroughly. Place infants skin-to-skin when possible. For hypothermia, cover infants’ heads but do not obstruct the face. For hyperthermia, unbundle tightly wrapped infants.
Paediatric danger signs include signs of airway obstruction, increased breathing effort, cyanosis, altered mental status, moving only when stimulated or no movement at all, not feeding well or inability to drink or breastfeed, vomiting everything, seizures/convulsions and low body temperature.
The SAMPLE approach is a standard way of gathering the key history related to an illness or injury. Sources of information include the ill or injured person, family members, friends, bystanders or prior providers.
S: Signs and symptoms. The patient or family’s report of signs and symptoms is essential to assessment and management.
A: Allergies. It is important to be aware of medication allergies so that treatments do not cause harm. Allergies may also suggest anaphylaxis as the cause of acute symptoms.
M: Medications. Obtain a full list of medications that the person currently takes and ask about recent medication or dose changes. These may affect treatment decisions and are important to understanding the person's chronic conditions.
P: Past medical history. Knowing prior medical conditions may help in understanding the current illness and may change management choices.
L: Last oral intake. Record the time of last oral intake and whether solid or liquid. A full stomach increases the risk of vomiting and subsequent choking, especially with sedation or intubation that might be required for surgical procedures.
E: Events surrounding the injury or illness. Knowing the circumstances around the injury or illness may be helpful in understanding the cause, progression and severity.
If you have to intervene in any of the ABCDE categories, immediately plan for handover/transfer to a higher level of care.
Once you have completed the ABCDE approach, take a SAMPLE history and complete a physical examination based on the specific condition.
A good handover summary to the next provider requires brief identification of the patient, relevant elements of the SAMPLE history, physical examination findings, a record of interventions given, and plans for care needed next and other concerns.