Shortness of breath might not be anything to worry about, but sometimes it can be serious and you'll need to get medical help.
Call 112 or go to A&E immediately if you have severe difficulty breathing, you're gasping, choking or not able to get words out, your chest feels tight or heavy, you have pain that spreads to your arms, back, neck and jaw, your lips or skin are turning very pale, blue or grey, or you feel suddenly confused.
Do not drive to A&E. Ask someone to drive you or call 112 and ask for an ambulance.
Call 112 or go to A&E immediately if your child has difficulty breathing, they may make grunting noises or suck their stomach in under their ribcage, their lips or skin are turning very pale, blue or grey, they are suddenly confused, or they are limp, floppy or not responding like they normally do.
Contact NHS 112 if you have difficulty breathing and may be more short of breath than usual, feel sick or are being sick, are coughing up blood, have pain or swelling in one of your legs, or have heart palpitations.
Your shortness of breath may get worse when you've been doing your normal activities or when you lie down. You may feel short of breath and have swollen ankles. You may have been coughing for 3 weeks or more.
It's important to get medical advice to make sure it's nothing serious. You're not wasting anyone's time by getting it checked out.
Shortness of breath has lots of different causes.
Common causes include asthma, a chest infection, being overweight, smoking and a panic attack.
Sometimes shortness of breath could be a sign of something more serious, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), scarring of the lungs known as idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, heart failure and lung cancer.
Any treatment you may need depends on what's causing your symptoms.
Do not try to self-diagnose the cause of shortness of breath. Always see a GP.
If you know what's causing your shortness of breath, you can get advice about things you and other people can do to help.