Cholera is a severe acute watery diarrhoeal disease which can kill within hours if untreated. It is also a marker of inequity, poverty and lack of social development.


Cholera disproportionately impacts communities already burdened by conflict, climate change, displacement, malnutrition, who have limited access to safe water, basic sanitation, hygiene infrastructure and health care.
 Most cholera-related deaths are attributable to people not having timely access to medical care, because they have to walk hours to reach the nearest health facility.


cholera outbreaks across the world, including in countries which had not seen cholera cases in years and had invested in multisectoral control measures, such as Lebanon, Syria, Pakistan or Haiti. As of April 2023, at least 30 countries have witnessed cholera outbreaks, and at least another 20 countries sharing land borders face the risk of flare-ups. Collectively, this places over billion people directly at risk of cholera.


Not only are there more simultaneous outbreaks across the world, but the outbreaks are larger and more deadly than before.


Overall, the current number, size and concurrence of multiple outbreaks, the spread to areas free of cholera for years and the alarming high mortality rates present a major threat to global health security.






Efforts to strengthen cholera control measures at country level have suffered from decades of poor investment in the WASH and health sectors. The COVID-19 pandemic response put health systems under immense stress and resulted in competition for funding and human resources. Hard-won gains have shown to be insufficient against the effects of climate change and its related natural disasters. For instance, the current outbreak in Malawi - the worst in the country’s history - emerged at the intersection of multiple hazards, including a cyclone and flooding.


As the climate emergency worsens, human displacement will intensify, along with droughts and flooding -all conditions that give rise to cholera outbreaks. Unless we invest in systems that build preparedness and resilience among at-risk populations, the cholera burden will continue to rise.


The Oral Cholera Vaccine (OCV) can help protect the population either as part of preventive or reactive vaccination campaigns