Pneumonia


Pneumonia is inflammation of the lungs, usually caused by an infection. Some people will need to be treated with antibiotics, but babies, older people, and people with heart or lung conditions are at risk of getting seriously ill and may need treatment in hospital.


Symptoms of pneumonia can start suddenly or gradually over a few days.


They can include,a cough,shortness of breath,a high temperature,chest pain,an aching body, feeling very tired,loss of appetite


Ask for an urgent appointment if  you've had a cough for up to 3 weeks, you're coughing up yellow or green mucus (phlegm), you have chest pain that comes and goes, or happens when breathing or coughing. you're feeling short of breath


Call 999 or go to A&E if:
you're struggling to breathe — you're choking, gasping and unable to speak you have pale, blue or blotchy skin, lips or tongue you're coughing up blood, you suddenly feel confused — for example, you do not know where you are , you cannot wake your baby or they feel floppy


Do not drive to A&E. Ask someone to drive you or call 999 and ask for an ambulance.
Treatment for pneumonia


Pneumonia is usually caused by a bacterial or viral infection. If you have pneumonia caused by bacteria, you'll usually be given antibiotics.


Depending on your symptoms, most people get better in to 4 weeks.


Some people are more at risk of becoming seriously ill. You may need to go to hospital for treatment if:
- you're over 65


- you have cardiovascular disease or a long-term lung condition


- your baby or young child has pneumonia
- you're very unwell
- you're not getting better after taking antibiotics


In hospital you'll usually be given antibiotics, and sometimes steroids, to treat the infection. You may also be given oxygen to help you breathe.


You may be sent for an X-ray of your chest and blood tests to check for other conditions.


If you're given antibiotics to take at home, keep taking them until you've finished them all, even if you start to feel better. Contact your doctor if you do not feel any better after taking them for to 3 days.




There are some things you can do to help with recovery from pneumonia.
rest until you feel better — try to stay at home if you have a high temperature or do not feel well enough to do normal activities
drink plenty of fluids
6 take paracetamol or ibuprofen (if you have been told you can take it) to help with pain or a high temperature


cover your mouth and nose with a tissue when you cough or sneeze
put used tissues in the bin as quickly as possible
wash your hands regularly with water and soap
Don't do not take cough medicine — coughing helps your body get rid of the infection
 do not smoke


Stopping smoking also reduces your chance of getting pneumonia.